While major AI labs are busy minmaxing
user experience, Deepseek has just
published a version two of their R1
model and published the best math
proving model a few weeks ago which
outperforms all other closed and open
source models called Deepseek Prover V2.
And today we are going to focus more on
this prover model because it came along
with this new research paper sharing how
they figured out a pipeline to
synthesize a data set which can create a
state-of-the-art reasoning model that
can prove theorems extremely rigorously.
To put it in perspective, on a formal
mathematical reasoning benchmark called
the Putnham bench, which has a
collection of 657 questions from the
Putnham mathematical competition, which
is known for its conceptual depth and
extreme difficulty. The previous
state-of-the-art model is only able to
solve 10 questions when given 192 tries
with 04 Mini High only able to solve two
questions and Gemini 2.5 Pro solving
merely three on their first try. But
Deep Seek Prover is able to solve 49
questions in total, which is nearly five
times more than the previous
state-of-the-art. While it might be past
1,024, which is basically retrying for
1,024 times, it is still a huge
achievement as there are also other
models that have attempted more than
1,000 times yet cannot surpass the
one-digit score. So, in today's video,
we will dive into the methods of how
they made it work and what it could mean
for reasoning in the domain of math. But
before we dive into it, with data
brokers, IP restriction, and geob blocks
becoming more and more common, a
reliable VPN is no longer a nice to
have, but something essential to
navigate the internet. That's why I'd
like to introduce you to ProtonVPN.
Proton was born in Switzerland back in
2014 when a group of scientists sets out
to build an internet where privacy is
the default. And fast forward to today,
more than 100 million people trust the
Proton ecosystem. With them being
completely public funded and having no
VC behind, this lets them completely
lock in their goal of privacy first. But
why ProtonVPN? They have speed without
compromise. 10 GB per second servers
across 110 countries, plus their VPN
accelerator tech that can boost speeds
up to 400%. So 4K streaming and cloud
gaming feel native. They are also truly
private with no logs policy, Swiss
privacy laws, and fully open source code
that anyone can inspect. Their service
can easily put your mind to ease with an
addition of Net Shield ad and tracker
blocker so you can browse, shop, and
stream without creepy retargeting ads or
popups. ProtonVPN works everywhere,
ranging from your favorite streaming
services and supports torrenting even if
your ISP blocks it. What's even better
is that with one subscription, you will
receive a full ecosystem with vault
level email, cloud storage, and password
manager with the plan starting at just
$3.99 a month with a robust free tier so
you can try before you buy. So, if
you're ready to get control of your own
internet, check out ProtonVPN with the
link down in the description to start
protecting your connection today. And
thank you ProtonVPN for sponsoring this
video. Anyways, we have already passed
the stage of improving reasoning models
with vibes. Like, we can't really train
anything systematically when all our
criteria is just an ambiguous solve this
step by step. Like, how much of a step?
How do you know if something is broken
down too much or not broken down enough?
And it's not like the models really do
need to solve questions step by step
either. They pretty much just predict an
answer when there is enough information.
You can watch this video if you want to
know more. On top of that, some steps
are also completely trivial. Like what's
even the point of you telling me 1 plus
1 equals 2 when solving a calculus
question per se. So maybe we need a
change of perspective instead of trying
to figure out what's the lowest unit of
reasoning is. What if we flip our
approach and mark what a model cannot
solve. This brings us to how researchers
at Deep Seek trained Deep Seek Prover
V2, which is built for theorem proving.
Theorem proving is hard. It's not just
about solving math questions. It's
actually about constructing airtight
logical arguments step by step with no
room for error in order to prove an idea
is connected to the other. So, it not
only requires deep mathematical
understanding, but also the ability to
express logical reasoning in a highly
structured syntax. And to do it
systematically, theorem proving can be
done through a programming language
called the lean 4 that is able to verify
math statements and make sure all the
statements are rigorously defined. They
are then able to build this insane
synthetic data set through a recursive
pipeline using lean 4 with a two model
setup. We all know now that LMS have
pretty good reasoning capabilities, but
they often rely on heristics that don't
align well with the strict logical
requirements of formal proof systems. So
Deep Seek researchers set it up with
something like this. A large generalist
LLM, in this case Deep Seeek V3, writes
a sketch of a proof outline in natural
language. This initial step includes
having Deepseek V3 decompose a very
complex theorem into a series of sub
goals of smaller theorems and generate a
skeleton template with holes marked with
sorry. Then a smaller 7B prover model
pre-trained specifically on lean 4 and
math data is then used to fill these
holes. But what if a 7B prover cannot
solve one of the sub goals? Well, that
sub goal would then be broken down into
another collection of subpros to make it
easier to process. And if one of the sub
problems is too hard, it will again be
broken down into another collection of
sub problems. What's even nicer is that
math proofs are also kind of perfect for
this setup because how you do it
practically is also exactly like this.
While it might end up being hundreds of
short proofs, it can still combine back
recursively into one big complex proof.
So the extra reasoning steps are not
artificially created, but instead
something a model could then solve in
one shot. For example, a single highly
difficult inequality can be broken down
into four independent goals, a
hierarchical maneuver that is similar to
how we plan proofs in practice. And
after the lean for sub goals are
recursively solved, they are stitched
back into the original template along
with Deepseek V3's chain of thought
reasoning generated based on the lean
for proofs it has. The pipeline then
assembles hundreds of verified formal
proofs plus a step-by-step explanation
of why those steps exist, producing a
super rich training data. What's also
neat about this is that the large
DeepSeek V3 backbone never runs the
heavy math. Only the cheap 7B model
does, keeping the compute cost for
synthesizing a data set extremely low.
So with all the PhD level math questions
a model has already learned, this method
is like juicing out and organizing what
the model has learned previously,
creating an even stronger and consistent
model. And this pipeline creates what
the researchers call the code start
data. These few hundred of self-solve
proofs were enough to jumpst start a 671
billion parameters model that had never
seen lean for before. Keep in mind this
big model learns formal proof style
without any ground truth labeled by
humans. It was just a smaller agent
building out the data set. But of
course, the pipeline is still designed
by humans. This performed even better
than the previous state-of-the-art cold
prover, which had an approach that
starts from existing full proofs and
synthesizes the intermediate natural
language steps retroactively. Once the
model has trained enough on the co-star
proofs, the researchers then switch to
group relative policy optimization to
polish the model even more using
reinforcement learning. The basic reward
here is simple. They gave it a binary
signal one if the generated lean proof
is verified as correct. is zero if it's
not. But with only this, they noticed
that sometimes the proofs generated by
the model would stray from the structure
lema decomposition that was taught
through the co-star data. So to keep the
model on track, especially for complex
multi-step theorems, they added a
consistency reward in the early stages
of RL. This reward penalizes the model
if its proof structure significantly
diverges from the intended
decomposition, encouraging it to use all
the planned intermediate lemmas, which
in the co-star data's case is marked
with a half tag. So, a strong co-star
data followed by two simple rewards in
RL is the key to Deep Seek Prover V2's
success. Their results for fine-tuning
both a 671 billion parameters and a 7
billion parameters prover also led to
some fascinating observations. First,
when you compare proofs generated by the
two models with different sizes, the
bigger model has so deeply internalized
the process of breaking down problems
and reasoning that when you did not ask
to explain reasoning step by step
explicitly, they still can't entirely
switch it off. Some of this internalized
step-by-step reasoning naturally leaks
out or gets externalized as these brief
comments in its dean code. It's as if
the model is now very used to thinking
in a structured explanatory way that it
subtly continues to do so even when the
prompt doesn't demand it. But the most
surprising discovery still came from the
smaller 7B model, specifically its
non-chain of thought version on the
tough putnum benchmark. This little 7B
model actually solved 13 problems that
its giant 671B sibling could not. Turns
out the 7B model had discovered a
specific skill. It frequently used these
two lean tactics to handle problems
involving finite cardalities. These
tactics were not found in the 671b model
solutions for those problems. It may
just be a coincidence, but it showed
that the smaller model was able to
achieve skill discovery that the bigger
more general model hasn't been able to
pick up. So on the PNM bench, Deep Seek
Prover V2's ability to formally solve 49
problems is actually 62 in total when
combined with 7B models unique skills.
And lastly, to address the elephant in
the room, how is this really different
from a model trained for math? Because
this is not a model hitting some crazy
score on Amy or USA. Well, these
standard maths solving AI models are
usually trained to find a numerical
answer or provide a natural language
explanation without a fully formal
machine verifiable reasoning path. They
are not subjected to the absolute line
by line logical scrutiny that formal
proof language like lean for demands.
Deepseek prover on the other hand leaves
no room for ambiguity or unstated
assumptions. This inherent robustness
that is trained through RL would
potentially make training downstream
math solving skills much better and
easier. So while standard math solvers
might currently achieve higher pass
rates on broader sets of math problems,
DeepSeek Prover is demonstrating
state-of-the-art performance in a domain
that demands absolute precision and
correctness. And if a formal prover
solves a theorem, that solution is by
definition logically and refutable
within its system. And if we can add in
a system to check calculations accuracy
systematically, then imagine if all the
other LLM are trained with math this
rigorously, I think this holds a pretty
big promise for improving the
reliability of AI reasoning across the
board in the future and bring the
performance of math to the next level.
And yeah, that's it for this video. If
you like today's research paper review,
definitely check out my newsletter where
I cover the latest and the juiciest
papers weekly. on there, you will be
completely up to date every week on the
cool new AI research. So you don't have
to wait for my videos because I am
always slow at making them. And thank
you guys for watching. A big shout out
to Andrew Chelas, Chris Leoo, Degan News
Research, Kanan, Robert Zaviasa, Leis
Muk, Ben Shainer, Marcelo, Ferraria,
Zane, Sheep, Poof, and Enu, DX Research
Group, and many others that support me
through Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on
Twitter if you haven't and I'll see
youall in the next